For a more practical and simple way to understand machine learning;
ML is simply about extracting knowledge from data.
It is a special field that transcends through many other fields.
Machine learning evolved from the intersection of statistics, artificial intelligence,
and computer science. It is also known as predictive or statistical learning. 

Different applications of Machine learning in the world today include;
Auto recommendations of which movies to watch, food to order, products to buy, 
recognizing friends in photos. Complex websites such as Facebook, Amazon or Netflix usually operate with machine learning algorithms.
Scientific problems  such as understanding stars, finding distant planets, discovering new particles, analyzing DNA sequences,
and PROVIDING personalized cancer treatments.
Your application doesn’t need to be as large-scale or world-changing as these examples in order to benefit from machine learning, though. 
Some practical applications of machine learning in our everyday life include moving of messages to a Spam folder in our Gmail, 
detection of fraudulent activities online, recommendation of words while typing 

The most successful kinds of machine learning algorithms are those that automate decision-making
processes by generalizing from known examples. Machine learning is generally divided into supervised and Unsupervised learning.
In supervised ML, the user provides the algorithm with pairs of inputs and desired outputs, and the algorithm finds a way to produce 
the desired output given an input. In particular, the algorithm is able to create an output for an input it has never seen before
without any help from a human. Going back to our example of spam classification, using machine learning, the user provides the algorithm 
with a large number of emails (which are the input), together with information about
whether any of these emails are spam (which is the desired output). Given a new email, the algorithm will then produce a prediction as to
whether the new email is spam.
Machine learning algorithms that learn from input/output pairs are called supervised learning algorithms because a “teacher” provides supervision
to the algorithms in the form of the desired outputs for each example that they learn from. While creating a dataset of inputs and outputs is often 
a laborious manual process, supervised learning algorithms are well understood and their performance is easy to measure. 
Unsupervised algorithms are the other type of algorithm . In unsupervised learning, only the input data is known, and no known output data is given 
to the algorithm. While there are many successful applications of these methods, they are usually harder to understand and evaluate.
Examples of problems solved with unsupervised machine learning include Identifying topics in a set of blog posts, Segmenting customers into groups with similar 
preferences, Detecting abnormal access patterns to a website. We also have reinforcement learning and deep learning as a branch of machine learning ; 
they would be covered as we move up the ladder. 
Happy learning! 

Reference: Introduction to Machine Learning with python : a guide for data scientists by Andreas C. Müller and Sarah Guido. 



  
